Again, I was now president now and we had a bill that came.
There were two things.
A, we had increasing maintenance costs.
This is a brand of throat.
A brand of throat, yeah.
And also the whole place needed rewiring and other things doing.
And it was costed out at quite a few hundred pounds.
We had the 400,000 which we could have paid for but the 400,000 was giving us interest,
etc.
So then we had a guy came, I can't remember his name now, with an offer that he would
build us a new synagogue if he could buy the property.
And I did a deal with him that it would be a straight swap.
You get permission to build a synagogue.
You get permission to knock this synagogue down.
And you build us a synagogue so that when you knock down this one, or going to knock
it down, the following week we can move into the other one.
So there was no stop in services.
Continuity.
And that's the word, yeah.
And here the builder agreed to this but of course the members of the community, significant
now, quite a number, objected.
Now by then the community in Pennyland was decreasing.
If you knew it, it had a magnificent, the Sherman Hall was wonderful.
It was one of the best halls I've ever been to, attached to a synagogue.
That would take, you could have a function for about 200 people with ease in the Sherman
Hall.
But the synagogue, which would take about 500 people I suppose, maybe more, they're
getting about 20 people on a Saturday and about 20, maybe 30 in total.
So, you know, it was just about running.
So I decided in my wisdom that if they could get a purpose-built, smaller synagogue for
the community as the size is run, you see now we've become too big for the community
now, we wouldn't have the upkeep.
It would be under guarantee.
And also the other thing is, in order to get a rabbi to come to Cardiff, you have to have
a ritual bath called a mikvah.
And I thought, well, we can build a mikvah in the shul.
We built one in the shul for one Pennyland for the rabbi.
I thought, well, this time we could do it from scratch and have it integrated beautifully.
So I did the deal with the builder and took it to there that he should knock one down,
build the other one, build a mikvah, also organize that we could sell kosher food there
because now all the kosher shops in Cardiff had closed and we made an organization for
Also, we wanted a room before burial, you know, bodies where the bodies are kept and
prepared for burial.
That could all be on one site.
And I got that through the council.
So the next thing was to get an architect to do it, which I did.
A fellow gave me a book as a present from him, which he'd written.
But he was a shul architect.
He designed and that synagogue they got now won a prize, you know, when it was built as
the best religious building built in 2002 or something like that.
And he arranged it that there should be, if you go there, no windows.
There's just, have you been in there?
You probably didn't notice, but there are no windows.
There's an atrium in the middle.
But those along the side, they are from the old synagogue, the windows, they're in a case
and they're lit.
There's lamps behind them.
So they're lit up.
But of course, one of the main people's objections to building the new synagogue is what about
our stained glass windows?
And I said, but what about the community?
You can't have a community with stained glass windows.
You've got to have a decent synagogue where you could go and pray and not feel that you're
in a mausoleum, which is so big.
See, and when that's so, I used to go, I came up to London, had meetings with the architect.
And we had arranged meetings with the builder and the architect down here.
And I had to do all that on my own because everyone else was either not keen or too busy.
But even then, having done the deal, people then said, he's making too much money because
he's having property.
He's going to set build houses.
He's going to build houses that cost so many hundreds of thousands.
And he's going to make hundreds of thousands of pounds.
And we're just going to have a little synagogue.
And I got it through on a casting vote.
And now, of course, they all say, it's wonderful.
Yeah.
That's how, but there we are.
Now you know the story of the synagogue.